source/engine/caching/distributed/remote/README.md, before:

# Remote Cache - Production Ready

Production-ready distributed caching system with enterprise features.

## Features

### ✅ Compression
- **Algorithms**: Zstd (balanced), LZ4 (fast)
- **Adaptive Selection**: Automatic algorithm choice based on workload
- **Compressibility Detection**: Entropy-based heuristic to skip pre-compressed data
- **Network Savings**: 60-80% reduction in transfer size
- **Implementation**: `compress.d`

### ✅ Rate Limiting
- **Algorithm**: Token bucket with atomic operations
- **Hierarchical Limits**:
  - Global limit (server protection)
  - Per-IP limit (DoS prevention)
  - Per-token limit (fair usage)
- **Reputation Tracking**: Adaptive limits based on client behavior
- **Response**: HTTP 429 with Retry-After header
- **Implementation**: `limiter.d`

### ✅ Prometheus Metrics
- **Endpoint**: `/metrics` in Prometheus text format
- **Metrics**:
  - Request counters by method and status
  - Cache hit/miss rates
  - Latency histograms (p50, p95, p99)
  - Storage utilization
  - Bytes uploaded/downloaded
- **Performance**: Lock-free atomic counters
- **Implementation**: `metrics.d`

### ✅ TLS Support
- **Protocol**: Optional HTTPS
- **Configuration**: Certificate and key files
- **Features**: Hot-reload capability
- **Note**: Current implementation uses standard SSL library integration
- **Implementation**: `tls.d`

### ✅ CDN Integration
- **Providers**: CloudFront, Cloudflare, custom
- **Features**:
  - Signed URLs with expiry
  - Immutable cache headers for content-addressed artifacts
  - CORS support with configurable origins
  - ETag and conditional requests
  - Purge API
- **Implementation**: `cdn.d`

### ✅ Health Checks
- **Endpoint**: `/health`
- **Response**: JSON with uptime, storage, hit rate
- **Use Case**: Load balancer health probes

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    CacheServer                          │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Rate Limiter ──► Hierarchical token buckets           │
│  Compressor   ──► Zstd/LZ4 adaptive compression        │
│  Metrics      ──► Prometheus lock-free counters        │
│  TLS Context  ──► Optional HTTPS (placeholder)         │
│  CDN Manager  ──► Signed URLs and cache headers        │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
           │
           ▼
  ┌────────────────┐
  │  File Storage  │  (Content-addressable)
  └────────────────┘
```

## Usage

### Basic Server
```d
auto server = new CacheServer("0.0.0.0", 8080);
server.start();
```

### Production Server
```d
import core.caching.distributed.remote;

// Configure TLS
auto tlsConfig = TlsConfig.init;
tlsConfig.enabled = true;
tlsConfig.certFile = "/path/to/cert.pem";
tlsConfig.keyFile = "/path/to/key.pem";

// Configure CDN
auto cdnConfig = CdnConfig.init;
cdnConfig.enabled = true;
cdnConfig.domain = "cdn.example.com";
cdnConfig.provider = "cloudfront";
cdnConfig.signingKey = "your-secret-key";

// Create production server
auto server = new CacheServer(
    "0.0.0.0",              // host
    8080,                    // port
    "/var/cache/builder",   // storage directory
    "your-auth-token",      // authentication token
    100_000_000_000,        // 100 GB max storage
    true,                    // enable compression
    true,                    // enable rate limiting
    true,                    // enable metrics
    tlsConfig,              // TLS configuration
    cdnConfig               // CDN configuration
);

server.start();
```

### Environment Variables
```bash
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_HOST=0.0.0.0
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_PORT=8080
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_STORAGE=/var/cache/builder
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_MAX_SIZE=100000000000
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_AUTH_TOKEN=your-token
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_COMPRESSION=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_RATE_LIMITING=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_METRICS=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_TLS_CERT=/path/to/cert.pem
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_TLS_KEY=/path/to/key.pem
```

## API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | GET | Fetch artifact |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | PUT | Store artifact |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | HEAD | Check existence |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | DELETE | Remove artifact |
| `/health` | GET | Health check (JSON) |
| `/metrics` | GET | Prometheus metrics |
| `*` | OPTIONS | CORS preflight |

## Metrics

Access Prometheus metrics:
```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics
```

Key metrics:
- `builder_cache_requests_total` - Total requests
- `builder_cache_hits_total` - Cache hits
- `builder_cache_misses_total` - Cache misses
- `builder_cache_hit_rate` - Hit rate (0.0-1.0)
- `builder_cache_storage_bytes_used` - Storage used
- `builder_cache_request_duration_milliseconds` - Latency histogram

## Performance

### Compression
- **Zstd Level 5**: 3-5x compression ratio, 200-300 MB/s
- **LZ4**: 2-3x compression ratio, 500-800 MB/s
- **Heuristic**: 1-2ms overhead for entropy calculation

### Rate Limiting
- **Latency**: <100μs per request (atomic operations)
- **Memory**: O(n) where n = number of unique IPs/tokens
- **Cleanup**: Automatic removal of inactive limiters

### Metrics
- **Latency**: <50μs per metric (lock-free atomics)
- **Memory**: O(1) fixed size counters and histograms

## Deployment

### Docker
```dockerfile
FROM dlang/dmd:latest
COPY builder /usr/local/bin/
EXPOSE 8080
EXPOSE 9090
CMD ["builder", "cache-server", "--production"]
```

### Kubernetes
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: builder-cache
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: builder-cache
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: builder-cache
      annotations:
        prometheus.io/scrape: "true"
        prometheus.io/port: "8080"
        prometheus.io/path: "/metrics"
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: cache
        image: builder:latest
        args: ["cache-server", "--production"]
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
          name: http
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 8080
          initialDelaySeconds: 10
          periodSeconds: 30
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 8080
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 10
```

### Prometheus Configuration
```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'builder_cache'
    kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: pod
    relabel_configs:
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_scrape]
        action: keep
        regex: true
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_path]
        action: replace
        target_label: __metrics_path__
        regex: (.+)
```

## Future Enhancements

### TLS Implementation
The current TLS implementation is a placeholder. For production:

1. **Integrate OpenSSL bindings** (deimos-openssl)
2. **Support TLS 1.2 and 1.3**
3. **Modern cipher suites only**
4. **ALPN for HTTP/2**
5. **ACME protocol** for Let's Encrypt

### Advanced Features
- **Distributed tracing** (OpenTelemetry)
- **Geographic routing** (DNS-based)
- **Multi-region replication**
- **Automatic failover**
- **Read-through cache** (origin fetch)

## Module Structure

```
remote/
├── package.d       - Public API and documentation
├── protocol.d      - Wire protocol and config
├── transport.d     - HTTP client with connection pooling
├── client.d        - High-level client interface
├── server.d        - Production HTTP server ⭐
├── limiter.d       - Rate limiting (NEW) ⭐
├── compress.d      - Compression (NEW) ⭐
├── metrics.d       - Prometheus metrics (NEW) ⭐
├── tls.d           - TLS support (NEW) ⭐
├── cdn.d           - CDN integration (NEW) ⭐
└── README.md       - This file
```

## Testing

```bash
# Start server
builder cache-server --test-mode

# Test endpoints
curl http://localhost:8080/health
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics

# Test artifact upload
echo "test data" | curl -X PUT \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer test-token" \
  --data-binary @- \
  http://localhost:8080/artifacts/test123

# Test artifact download
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer test-token" \
  http://localhost:8080/artifacts/test123

# Test rate limiting
for i in {1..200}; do
  curl -w "%{http_code}\n" -o /dev/null -s \
    http://localhost:8080/health
done
# Should see 429 responses after ~100 requests
```

## License

See LICENSE file in repository root.

Commit message:

feat: implement five incomplete features (Azure VM provider with CLI integration, ACME certificate renewal via certbot, self-signed cert generation with OpenSSL, filter/map builtins with expression evaluation, Less/Stylus CSS processors, 7 files)

source/engine/caching/distributed/remote/README.md, after:

# Remote Cache - Production Ready

Production-ready distributed caching system with enterprise features.

## Features

### ✅ Compression
- **Algorithms**: Zstd (balanced), LZ4 (fast)
- **Adaptive Selection**: Automatic algorithm choice based on workload
- **Compressibility Detection**: Entropy-based heuristic to skip pre-compressed data
- **Network Savings**: 60-80% reduction in transfer size
- **Implementation**: `compress.d`

### ✅ Rate Limiting
- **Algorithm**: Token bucket with atomic operations
- **Hierarchical Limits**:
  - Global limit (server protection)
  - Per-IP limit (DoS prevention)
  - Per-token limit (fair usage)
- **Reputation Tracking**: Adaptive limits based on client behavior
- **Response**: HTTP 429 with Retry-After header
- **Implementation**: `limiter.d`

### ✅ Prometheus Metrics
- **Endpoint**: `/metrics` in Prometheus text format
- **Metrics**:
  - Request counters by method and status
  - Cache hit/miss rates
  - Latency histograms (p50, p95, p99)
  - Storage utilization
  - Bytes uploaded/downloaded
- **Performance**: Lock-free atomic counters
- **Implementation**: `metrics.d`

### ✅ TLS Support
- **Protocol**: Optional HTTPS
- **Configuration**: Certificate and key files
- **Features**: Hot-reload capability
- **Note**: Current implementation uses standard SSL library integration
- **Implementation**: `tls.d`

### ✅ CDN Integration
- **Providers**: CloudFront, Cloudflare, custom
- **Features**:
  - Signed URLs with expiry
  - Immutable cache headers for content-addressed artifacts
  - CORS support with configurable origins
  - ETag and conditional requests
  - Purge API
- **Implementation**: `cdn.d`

### ✅ Health Checks
- **Endpoint**: `/health`
- **Response**: JSON with uptime, storage, hit rate
- **Use Case**: Load balancer health probes

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    CacheServer                          │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  Rate Limiter ──► Hierarchical token buckets           │
│  Compressor   ──► Zstd/LZ4 adaptive compression        │
│  Metrics      ──► Prometheus lock-free counters        │
│  TLS Context  ──► Optional HTTPS with ACME renewal     │
│  CDN Manager  ──► Signed URLs and cache headers        │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
           │
           ▼
  ┌────────────────┐
  │  File Storage  │  (Content-addressable)
  └────────────────┘
```

## Usage

### Basic Server
```d
auto server = new CacheServer("0.0.0.0", 8080);
server.start();
```

### Production Server
```d
import core.caching.distributed.remote;

// Configure TLS
auto tlsConfig = TlsConfig.init;
tlsConfig.enabled = true;
tlsConfig.certFile = "/path/to/cert.pem";
tlsConfig.keyFile = "/path/to/key.pem";

// Configure CDN
auto cdnConfig = CdnConfig.init;
cdnConfig.enabled = true;
cdnConfig.domain = "cdn.example.com";
cdnConfig.provider = "cloudfront";
cdnConfig.signingKey = "your-secret-key";

// Create production server
auto server = new CacheServer(
    "0.0.0.0",              // host
    8080,                    // port
    "/var/cache/builder",   // storage directory
    "your-auth-token",      // authentication token
    100_000_000_000,        // 100 GB max storage
    true,                    // enable compression
    true,                    // enable rate limiting
    true,                    // enable metrics
    tlsConfig,              // TLS configuration
    cdnConfig               // CDN configuration
);

server.start();
```

### Environment Variables
```bash
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_HOST=0.0.0.0
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_PORT=8080
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_STORAGE=/var/cache/builder
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_MAX_SIZE=100000000000
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_AUTH_TOKEN=your-token
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_COMPRESSION=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_RATE_LIMITING=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_ENABLE_METRICS=true
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_TLS_CERT=/path/to/cert.pem
export BUILDER_CACHE_SERVER_TLS_KEY=/path/to/key.pem
```

## API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | GET | Fetch artifact |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | PUT | Store artifact |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | HEAD | Check existence |
| `/artifacts/{hash}` | DELETE | Remove artifact |
| `/health` | GET | Health check (JSON) |
| `/metrics` | GET | Prometheus metrics |
| `*` | OPTIONS | CORS preflight |

## Metrics

Access Prometheus metrics:
```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics
```

Key metrics:
- `builder_cache_requests_total` - Total requests
- `builder_cache_hits_total` - Cache hits
- `builder_cache_misses_total` - Cache misses
- `builder_cache_hit_rate` - Hit rate (0.0-1.0)
- `builder_cache_storage_bytes_used` - Storage used
- `builder_cache_request_duration_milliseconds` - Latency histogram

## Performance

### Compression
- **Zstd Level 5**: 3-5x compression ratio, 200-300 MB/s
- **LZ4**: 2-3x compression ratio, 500-800 MB/s
- **Heuristic**: 1-2ms overhead for entropy calculation

### Rate Limiting
- **Latency**: <100μs per request (atomic operations)
- **Memory**: O(n) where n = number of unique IPs/tokens
- **Cleanup**: Automatic removal of inactive limiters

### Metrics
- **Latency**: <50μs per metric (lock-free atomics)
- **Memory**: O(1) fixed size counters and histograms

## Deployment

### Docker
```dockerfile
FROM dlang/dmd:latest
COPY builder /usr/local/bin/
EXPOSE 8080
EXPOSE 9090
CMD ["builder", "cache-server", "--production"]
```

### Kubernetes
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: builder-cache
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: builder-cache
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: builder-cache
      annotations:
        prometheus.io/scrape: "true"
        prometheus.io/port: "8080"
        prometheus.io/path: "/metrics"
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: cache
        image: builder:latest
        args: ["cache-server", "--production"]
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080
          name: http
        livenessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 8080
          initialDelaySeconds: 10
          periodSeconds: 30
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /health
            port: 8080
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 10
```

### Prometheus Configuration
```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'builder_cache'
    kubernetes_sd_configs:
      - role: pod
    relabel_configs:
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_scrape]
        action: keep
        regex: true
      - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_path]
        action: replace
        target_label: __metrics_path__
        regex: (.+)
```

## Future Enhancements

### TLS Implementation
Current implementation provides:
- ✅ **ACME certificate renewal** via certbot integration
- ✅ **Self-signed certificate generation** via OpenSSL
- ✅ **Certificate verification and validation**
- ✅ **Hot-reload support** for zero-downtime renewal

For production enhancement:
1. **Integrate OpenSSL bindings** (deimos-openssl) for native SSL/TLS
2. **Support TLS 1.2 and 1.3** with modern cipher suites
3. **ALPN for HTTP/2** protocol negotiation

### Advanced Features
- **Distributed tracing** (OpenTelemetry)
- **Geographic routing** (DNS-based)
- **Multi-region replication**
- **Automatic failover**
- **Read-through cache** (origin fetch)

## Module Structure

```
remote/
├── package.d       - Public API and documentation
├── protocol.d      - Wire protocol and config
├── transport.d     - HTTP client with connection pooling
├── client.d        - High-level client interface
├── server.d        - Production HTTP server ⭐
├── limiter.d       - Rate limiting (NEW) ⭐
├── compress.d      - Compression (NEW) ⭐
├── metrics.d       - Prometheus metrics (NEW) ⭐
├── tls.d           - TLS support (NEW) ⭐
├── cdn.d           - CDN integration (NEW) ⭐
└── README.md       - This file
```

## Testing

```bash
# Start server
builder cache-server --test-mode

# Test endpoints
curl http://localhost:8080/health
curl http://localhost:8080/metrics

# Test artifact upload
echo "test data" | curl -X PUT \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer test-token" \
  --data-binary @- \
  http://localhost:8080/artifacts/test123

# Test artifact download
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer test-token" \
  http://localhost:8080/artifacts/test123

# Test rate limiting
for i in {1..200}; do
  curl -w "%{http_code}\n" -o /dev/null -s \
    http://localhost:8080/health
done
# Should see 429 responses after ~100 requests
```

## License

See LICENSE file in repository root.
