source/languages/README.md, before:

# Languages Package

The languages package provides language-specific build handlers and dependency analysis for multiple programming languages.

## Modules

### Core
- **base.d** - Base language interface and factory

### Supported Languages
- **python/** - Python with pip and virtual environments (modular)
- **javascript/** - JavaScript/Node.js with npm/yarn (modular)
- **typescript/** - TypeScript with type checking (modular)
- **go/** - Go with modules support (modular)
- **rust/** - Rust with Cargo (modular)
- **java.d** - Java with Maven/Gradle
- **cpp/** - C/C++ comprehensive modular support with compilers, build systems, analysis, and tools
- **csharp.d** - C# with .NET
- **ruby.d** - Ruby with Bundler
- **php/** - PHP with Composer (modular - analysis, formatting, packaging)
- **swift.d** - Swift with SPM
- **kotlin.d** - Kotlin with Gradle
- **scala.d** - Scala with sbt
- **elixir.d** - Elixir with Mix
- **lua.d** - Lua language support
- **nim.d** - Nim language support
- **zig.d** - Zig language support

## Usage

```d
import languages;

auto handler = LanguageFactory.create("python");
auto deps = handler.analyzeDependencies(sourceFile);
handler.build(target);
```

## Key Features

- Automatic dependency detection per language
- Language-specific build command generation
- Support for language-specific package managers
- Incremental compilation support
- Cross-language dependency handling

Commit message:

feat: modular F# language support with core/managers/tooling/analysis architecture, dotnet CLI/FAKE/fsc build systems, NuGet/Paket package management, Library/Executable/Script/Fable/Native AOT builders, Fantomas formatter, FSharpLint static analysis, Expecto/xUnit/NUnit test frameworks, F# Interactive scripting, and Fable JS/TS cross-compilation

source/languages/README.md, after:

# Languages Package

The languages package provides language-specific build handlers and dependency analysis for multiple programming languages.

## Modules

### Core
- **base.d** - Base language interface and factory

### Supported Languages
- **python/** - Python with pip and virtual environments (modular)
- **javascript/** - JavaScript/Node.js with npm/yarn (modular)
- **typescript/** - TypeScript with type checking (modular)
- **go/** - Go with modules support (modular)
- **rust/** - Rust with Cargo (modular)
- **java.d** - Java with Maven/Gradle
- **cpp/** - C/C++ comprehensive modular support with compilers, build systems, analysis, and tools
- **dotnet/** - .NET languages (modular)
  - **csharp.d** - C# with .NET
  - **fsharp/** - F# with functional programming, FAKE, Paket, Fantomas, Fable
- **ruby.d** - Ruby with Bundler
- **php/** - PHP with Composer (modular - analysis, formatting, packaging)
- **swift.d** - Swift with SPM
- **kotlin.d** - Kotlin with Gradle
- **scala.d** - Scala with sbt
- **elixir.d** - Elixir with Mix
- **lua.d** - Lua language support
- **nim.d** - Nim language support
- **zig.d** - Zig language support

## Usage

```d
import languages;

auto handler = LanguageFactory.create("python");
auto deps = handler.analyzeDependencies(sourceFile);
handler.build(target);
```

## Key Features

- Automatic dependency detection per language
- Language-specific build command generation
- Support for language-specific package managers
- Incremental compilation support
- Cross-language dependency handling
